Team Thunder JPEG: /Users/stewartpawley/Library/CloudStorage/OneDrive-SharedLibraries-IndianaUniversity/O365-IU-CSCI-CSCI-C435 - General/Ultima 2.0/Team Thunder.jpeg
Phase Label: Phase 1 - Scheduler and Semaphore

Phase 1: Scheduler and Semaphore

External Documentation

Overview
This phase implements the two core components required by the assignment:
1. A dynamic scheduler with a process table of Task Control Blocks.
2. A binary semaphore that blocks and wakes tasks without busy waiting.

Architecture
- Scheduler class:
  Maintains the dynamic process table.
  Creates tasks with a task name and entry point.
  Performs strict round-robin dispatch across READY tasks.
  Marks finished tasks as DEAD and later removes them through garbage_collect().
  Exposes dump(int level) so the process table can be printed in a readable form.

- Semaphore class:
  Stores the managed resource name, current binary value, and a queue of waiting task IDs.
  down() grants the resource if it is free, otherwise pushes the caller into the queue and blocks it.
  up() releases the resource or wakes the next queued task by moving it back to READY.
  Exposes dump(int level) so the semaphore value and queue contents can be inspected.

- Terminal Driver:
  Ultima.cpp presents the Phase 1 proof inside ncurses windows so the team can capture annotated screenshots and run a live demo in the terminal.
  Separate windows are now dedicated to the Scheduler class, Semaphore class, state/race-condition proof, Task_A, Task_B, Task_C, the system log, and a control/status panel.
  The terminal layout now uses a fixed top-anchored proof board that mirrors the screenshot deliverable and leaves the remainder of taller terminals blank for stable captures.
  The slowed-down proof runs in a single cycle by default, while continuous mode remains available only when the team explicitly wants the older repeating loop.
  The terminal front end preserves the visual workflow from the labs, but the mechanism being demonstrated is the scheduler and semaphore assignment rather than a standalone pthread race-condition lab.

Test Scenario
The demonstration uses three tasks and one shared resource named Printer_Output.

1. Task_A acquires Printer_Output and yields while still holding it.
2. Task_B requests the same resource and becomes BLOCKED.
3. Task_C requests the same resource and becomes BLOCKED behind Task_B.
4. A mid-execution snapshot is written to the log window showing:
   Task_A in READY or RUNNING state.
   Task_B and Task_C in BLOCKED state.
   Sema_value equal to 0.
   Sema_queue showing T-2 --> T-3.
   A flow marker reading Task_A -> Task_B BLOCKED -> Task_C BLOCKED.
5. Task_A releases the resource.
6. Task_B resumes, acquires the resource, releases it, and exits.
7. Task_C resumes, acquires the resource, releases it, and exits.
8. Final snapshots show DEAD tasks before garbage collection and an empty process table after cleanup.

How To Run
1. Configure the local build cache:
   cmake --preset macos-debug
2. Build the phase:
   cmake --build --preset macos-debug
3. Run the terminal demonstration:
   ~/.ultima2/build/macos-debug/ultima_os

Controls
- h refreshes the help and status panel.
- d appends an on-demand scheduler/semaphore dump to the log window.
- p pauses or resumes the visual scheduler proof.
- q stops the continuous demo after the current cycle finishes.
- Mouse clicks are logged to the terminal log window.

Assignment Compliance Notes
- The process table is dynamic.
- The scheduler tracks RUNNING, READY, BLOCKED, and DEAD states.
- The semaphore uses a queue and does not busy wait.
- dump() output is readable for both the scheduler and semaphore, and now includes ownership, queue, counters, and live task notes.
- The test plan demonstrates queueing, blocking, waking, and cleanup.
- The phase folder includes the assignment sheet, abstract, source files, make/build support, and output documentation.
- The pthread-protected UI directly addresses the race-condition concerns demonstrated in Lab 7.

Planning Estimate
Estimated team effort for Phase 1:
- Core scheduler and semaphore logic: 4 to 6 hours
- Terminal integration and screenshots: 2 to 3 hours
- Testing, debugging, and documentation: 3 to 4 hours
- Total estimated range: 9 to 13 hours
